hi everybody I just wanted to say that
this is going to be the last time that I
put my face here in this little corner
because I've been doing it without it
for my other class and my load times are
so much faster so just to make
everything easier right here at the end
I'm going to stop recording my face but
we can have zoom sessions and you can
see me and I can see you so here we go
into the gymnosperms whenever we
consider the evolution of a new group of
plants it's important to consider the
world that they're evolving within our
bryophytes were the first plants to move
onto land most likely and they would
have had this completely open
terrestrial surface which would have
been high exposure for them which is
tricky right that as stress that they
are going to have to adapt to but they
don't have to compete with any other
plants the seed free vascular plants
have to compete with the existing
bryophytes for space and for sunlight
however those existing bryophytes would
have already formed some sort of soil
base at least an organic layer that's
going to be water holding and then they
transport that water up to these higher
areal tissues with their lignified
vascular tissue and then they can grow a
hundred feet tall and we get forests of
seed free vascular plants so when the
gymnosperms evolved there were a lot of
large changes happening within the
global environment so for sea free
vascular plants in that Carboniferous
period and even in the Devonian we would
have had these kind of inland seas that
were pretty shallow and pretty swampy
most of the continental mass I think was
in the equatorial range so it was more
tropical overall but then we have these
new groups of plants that are evolving
right when you have the sea tree
vascular plants we're getting this
accumulation of woody tissue we have now
true roots that are penetrating down
into the soils so a lot of stuff is
happening another thing that's happening
is that insects are Co evolving with
these group of Puppets groups of plants
so insects evolved over 400 million
years ago around the same time as we
start seacrest real plants we start to
see terrestrial insects they evolved
from crustaceans that were aquatic so
they are Co evolving with these
from groups of plants and the first
winged insects roughly coincide with our
first gymnosperms so we think about
large events that were affecting the
climate and affecting the overall kind
of physical structure of the earth
around the time of terrestrial plants
first evolving we had global cooling and
that first soil building that first
would have been chemical where we have
metabolic acids being produced by these
organisms that are interacting with the
rocky surface right and then we get
physical weathering once we start to
develop roots those roots that develop
which happens when we get lignified
vascular tissue are going to be changing
the way that water flows around the
planet so they're gonna stabilize
riverbanks and alter the course and
structure of waterways and that's gonna
allow waterways to kind of carve deeper
as opposed to kind of being more
expansive and spreading out across the
surface so that means there's going to
be high water available water
availability in some areas and lower
water water availability in others ooh
so then we also start to see woody
debris from all of these sea free
vascular plants that have tons of this
lignified vascular tissue that
potentially organisms don't know how to
break down yet they haven't maybe
evolved the ability to deal with lignin
so that woody debris is clogging
waterways it's altering the course of
rivers we're also starting to see soil
enrichment so this building of soils
from the bottom with the rocky parent
material and from the top with these
deposits of organic matter and this is
the world in which the gymnosperms
evolved so that we're gymnosperm means
naked seed so we have one big
evolutionary leap we get seeds those are
the first seed plants but those seeds
aren't contained within any kind of
vessel for at least most of the groups
so we have seeds and we can send our
offspring out with a bunch of extra
nutrition so that hopefully they'll have
a better chance of survival
so in these few videos we're going to
look at some additions to the big
phylogeny and what that will be are
these characteristics of gymnosperms so
what new traits do we see that are
uniting these newly evolved seed plants
under those characteristics of
gymnosperms we'll look at zero fitted
leafs will draw a cross-section of a
pine needle and review those
characteristics that we learned in the
leaf lab that allowed these leaves to be
highly adapted to dry conditions number
zero means dry then we'll look at
gymnosperm diversity we have four major
groups of gymnosperms the gnetophytes
aren't really the gnetophyta anymore
they belong within the conifers most
likely so some characteristics of
gymnosperms gymnosperms have secondary
growth so this means they have true
woody tissues right instead of just
having woody tissues that allow you to
make these water pipes and grow tall now
they allow for we have wood rod with
wood and that allows for this increase
in the girth of the trunk right so
instead of just growing up which primary
growth allows you to do now our trunks
can get wider so that provides more
structural support for getting even
taller in addition to secondary growth
our would eat issues we have pollen as
dispersal
so up until this point we had spores for
dispersal for our bryophytes and for our
seed free vascular plants they would
have their propagules that they were
releasing be those spores so now we have
pollen and pollen is the male
gametophyte this is also called the
micro gametophyte so now we have aerial
dispersal of this micro gametophyte
because we are now sending our micro
gametophyte out into the world we have
made it smaller so now we have a four
celled micro gametophyte
and what what this corresponds to is a
loss of antheridia so before we had
these multicellular gamete an Jia now we
only have multicellular gamete an Geum
for the female gametophyte so the
archegonia still exists but we have lost
antheridia now we just have this four
celled micro gametophyte the next big
evolution we have our seeds so think of
a seed as before we are mass producing
spores right as we send those out to go
grow into gametophyte and then those
gametophyte s' have to then produce our
gametes which they I need to go fuse so
we didn't really send those out with
much of a chance for survival instead we
relied on just high production with
seeds you might be producing fewer
propagules but what you're going to do
is you're going to put a bunch of
nutrients and storage into that seed to
then say okay I've made a zygote I did
it I can reproduce now but I want this
thing to be able to survive once it gets
there so these seeds are like sending
your kids out with a sack lunch right
giving it the more of a chance to
survive once it gets out into the world
so now we have this stored nutrients and
protective coating for our sides and
then specific to gymnosperms we're going
to c0 fitted leaves and this corresponds
to the conditions that they're adapting
to the world is drying out water is
being increasingly channeled into
specific waterways instead of having
these large inland seas the continents
are moving around mountains are forming
and overall the land masses are drying
out so we have to have adaptations for
dealing with that harsh environment
which would be these xerophytic leaves
as well as the bark that we're going to
have with our secondary growth all right
here's a review ooh
header ah Spurs this was something that
I left off so heteros Burruss we have a
mega spores and those mega spores are
retained so we saw hetero Spurs
condition in Salah janela and that was
the first time we saw it and then it
disappeared so it just sort of evolved
within Sailaja nila and then it
convergently evolved within all of the
gymnosperms and angiosperms so all of
our seed plants are going to have
megaspores
and microspores and those mega spores
are going to be retained let's put all
these characteristics onto the big
phylogeny
we'll put our ferns and horsetails here
we would have had mega fills leaves with
branching vascular tissue and the
conifer lineage is not the kind of
relating into the gymnosperm lineage is
a little tricky so it's monophyletic
they all derive from a single ancestor
but who comes out first and how these
groups are related is still under
investigation so we are using
information from the 1kb
so a thousand plant transcriptomes and
they have the ginkgos as coming out
first then the cycads and I'm drawing
this somewhat incorrectly here we have
the fan opps a toe so these are the
conifers and within the pin-up Sita we
have the Nita bites most likely
according to this particular research
we're using so this indicates that these
two are separate groups the way that
I've drawn it but this is within this so
just know that but it makes it too
confusing looking if I try to draw it a
different way okay so let's add our
traits to our main line we have seeds we
have pollen we have secondary growth
would we have heteros Buress with the
megaspore retained and we have a loss of
antheridia so all of these traits
continue on into our next group so you
could even fill this in here kantha FATA
those are our angiosperms and that'll be
our last group so they're all on the
main line I'm going to put zero FIDIC
leaves here because we don't know what
the earliest angiosperms look like they
might have had zero fitta cleaves they
might not all of our gymnosperms that we
look at do have zero FIDIC leaves and so
that's a trait that we can put to unite
this group and everything after it but
I'm not going to put it on the main line
because that's not really going to be a
trait that helps us distinguish our
angiosperms one thing that's also maybe
kind of important is that wood has
potentially likely evolved many
different times and how secondary growth
occurs so it's possible that this
doesn't really belong here but for
simplicity we will keep it there